# MSUCOSTECH
Montana State University Environmental Laboratory Shiny application for creating automated data reports from raw Costech ECS 4010 data.

Users must have R downloaded on the computer they are running the application from.(?) 

The application can be found at **URL**

### Inputs
The application takes a .xlsx with Result Table, Chromatogram Data, Chromatogram Graph, and Summary Table tabs.  When the user browses to their raw Costech data the Summary Table of the Excel file is imported. The user also must provide inputs for the following parameters in the model;
  + Detection Limit Factor: To estimate 'below detection limit', what is the factor to divide the low calibration standard by? Default is 2.5.
  + Total Nitrogen Uncertainty Factor: Estimate for the uncertainty of total nitrogen %. Provide as decimal, default is 0.1.
  + Total Carbon Uncertainty Factor: Estimate for the uncertainty of total Carbon %. Provide as decimal, default is 0.05.
  + Nitrogen Consensus Value: Consensus value for nitrogen derived from prior Costech standards, divided from the measured standards to evaluate new measurements with prior Costech data. 
  + Carbon Consensus Value: Consensus value for carbon derived from prior Costech standards, divided from the measured standards to evaluate new measurements with prior Costech data. 

The output Excel spreadsheet has a sheet called User Inputs that contains columns with the name of each input above, the abbreviation used in the code, and the entry the user provided. If the user does not provide one of the inputs, the User Inputs table will display the default value used for the calculations. See the workflow for where each input is used in the code.

### Outputs
When raw data and inputs are provided, the user must select the 'Create Report' button. The output data report will be **automatically downloaded upon completion.** The output Excel sheet has tabs for **Results, Summary Table, Calibration Range, Standards, and User Inputs**. The Results table contains columns for the sample ID, the percent total nitrogen and carbon, uncertainties for nitrogen and carbon, and a flag for each indicating whether the observation was above or below the quantifiable limit ('aql', 'bql'), below the detection limit ('bdl'), or within detectable limits ('ok'). The uncertainties are calculated by multiplying the weight percent by the user specified uncertainty factor. The Summary Table contains the unmodified raw data. The Calibration Range table contains the low and high quantifiable limits for nitrogen and carbon, calculated from the minimum and maximum nitrogen and carbon values measured in the acetanalide samples. This table also contains the detection limit for nitrogen and carbon, calculated by dividing the low quantifiable limit by the user specified detection limit factor. The Standards table contains the sample ID, weight (mg), weight percent, and retention time for nitrogen and carbon for each observation. This table also has columns for the mean, standard deviation, and coefficient of variation for the measured standards and a consensus metric for each observation, calculated as the measured value divided by the user specified consensus value for nitrogen and carbon. 

### Workflow
The following image shows the workflow for creating the automated report from the Costech. The workflow shows the inputs used in the code and Shiny application, the functions used in the application code, and the tables that compose the exported report.

![Workflow for the MSU EAL Costech automated data report. Green shapes in the image below characterize inputs, with ovals representing inputs that are also used in the Shiny application. Functions used in the application are shown in blue and temporary data is represented by yellow shapes. Sheets in the exported Excel report are shown in coral. All of the inputs are included in the User Inputs table of the output.](https://github.com/paulhegedus/MSUCOSTECH/www/msucostech_workflow.png)

The workflow begins by importing raw data. This uses either the specified folder path and filename or just the filename, assuming it includes the full path, to extract the 'Summary Table' sheet of the specified Excel spreadsheet. Alternatively, this file is browsed to in the Shiny application, and data is imported the same way. When the user elects to create the data report, the raw data is immediately set aside for export. The Standards table is created using the raw data and consensus values for nitrogen and carbon. Next, the Calibration Range table is generated using a subset of the raw data including only the Acetanilide samples and the user specified detection limit factor. After the Calibration Range table is generated, the Results table is created using the calibration values and the user specified uncertainty factors. Finally, the data is packaged into an Excel file and exported. 

The following sections describe the arguments, process, and output for each function;
  + importRawDat(): Requires a path to the Excel file exported from the Costech ECS 4010. This function imports the Summary Table sheet, sets the column names, and returns the raw data frame. This requires the Costech outputs to remain standard.
  + genStandardsTab(): This function subsets Standard D samples from the raw data. Currently this process is performed via pattern matching expected codes used for Standard D samples. The SampleID column of the raw data is searched for 'Std_D', 'Standard', and 'StdD'. This is not case sensitive and requires a mild standardization of sample IDs. The mean and standard deviation are calculated for nitrogen and carbon and added as columns to the subset. The coefficient of variation for both elements are then calculated as the standard deviation divided by the mean. A consensus metric is then derived by dividing the weight percent by the user specified consensus value for each element. The columns of the subset are grouped by element and then returned to the user.
  + genCalRangeTab(): This function subsets Acetanilide samples from the raw data. Currently this process is performed via pattern matching expected codes used for Standard D samples. The SampleID column of the raw data is searched for 'Acetanilide', 'Acet', 'Acetan', 'Acetanalide', 'analide'. This is not case sensitive and requires a mild standardization of sample IDs. An empty Calibration Range table is generated and filled in with the following calculations. The low and high calibration ranges for each element are derived by the minimum and maximum weights in the Acetanilide subset. The DetectionLimit is calculated by dividing the low calibration range by the user specified detection limit factor. This may be a temporary process until a data-driven approach is developed. After the Calibration Range table has been completed, it is returned to the user. 
  + genResultsTab(): This function uses the identifiers for Standard D and Acetanilide samples to take all rows that aren't these or a bypass, identified by 'Bypass' or 'By pass' in the SampleID. The SampleID, weight and weight percents are the columns taken from the raw data during the subsetting process. The nitrogen and carbon percent uncertainty are calculated and added to the table by multiplying the weight percent by the nitrogen or carbon uncertainty factor that was specified by the user. For each element, the flag is derived by querying if the weight falls first below the detection limit, then within the bounds of the quantifiable limits. Observations are labeled 'bdl' if the measurement falls below the detection limit, 'bql' if the measurement falls below the lower quantifiable limit, 'aql' if the measurment exceeds the upper quantifiable limit, or 'ok' if it falls within the quantifiable limits. The weight columns are removed from the Results table, the columns are organized by element, and the Results table is returned to the user.
  + exportReport(): This function takes the User Inputs, Summary Table, Standards, Calibration Range, and Results table and puts them into an Excel spreasheet that is exported to the user's file system in the Downloads folder. 


